Git Revision Notes
Commands, meanings, and scenario-based examples from our full chat
Prepared for revision and copy-safe note keeping
1. Basic setup
git config --global user.name "Your Name"
Purpose: Sets the Git username for your computer.
When to use: During first-time setup on your laptop or PC.
Scenario: You installed Git for the first time and want your commits to show your own name.
git config --global user.name "Sagor Ahmed"

git config --global user.email "you@email.com"
Purpose: Sets the Git email used in your commits.
Scenario: You want GitHub to recognize your commits under the same email you use on GitHub.
git config --global user.email "sa267641@gmail.com"

git config --global --list
Purpose: Shows your saved Git configuration.
Scenario: After setting your name and email, you want to verify that both were saved correctly.
git config --global --list

2. Starting or copying a repository
git init
Purpose: Creates a new local Git repository in the current folder.
Scenario: You made a new project folder in VS Code and now want Git to start tracking versions.
mkdir my-project
cd my-project
git init

git clone <url>
Purpose: Copies an existing GitHub repository to your computer.
Scenario: Your teacher or teammate already made the project on GitHub and you want a local copy.
git clone https://github.com/classcse/my-fourth-repo.git

cd folder_name
Purpose: Moves the terminal into a folder.
Scenario: After cloning a repo, you need to enter that project folder before using Git commands.
cd my-fourth-repo

ls
Purpose: Lists files and folders in the current directory.
Scenario: You want to quickly check which files exist in the project.
ls

clear
Purpose: Clears the terminal screen.
Scenario: You ran many commands and want a clean terminal before continuing.
clear

3. Checking status and understanding file states
git status
Purpose: Shows which files are untracked, modified, staged, or clean.
Scenario: You edited files and want to know exactly what Git sees right now.
git status
Important note: Common states: untracked = new file, modified = changed but not staged, staged = ready to commit, unmodified = no change.

4. Adding and committing work
git add file_name
Purpose: Stages one specific file for the next commit.
Scenario: You changed index.html and style.css, but only want index.html in the next commit.
git add index.html

git add .
Purpose: Stages all changed files in the current project.
Scenario: You finished a small feature and want every changed file included in one commit.
git add .
Important note: Be careful: this can also stage files you did not intend to commit.

git commit -m "message"
Purpose: Creates a commit and saves the staged changes in branch history.
Scenario: You completed the login button and want a permanent saved checkpoint.
git commit -m "Add login button"

5. Connecting to GitHub and pushing
git remote add origin <url>
Purpose: Connects your local project to a remote GitHub repository named origin.
Scenario: You built your project locally first and then created an empty GitHub repo for it.
git remote add origin https://github.com/sagor/project.git

git remote -v
Purpose: Shows all connected remotes and their URLs.
Scenario: You forgot which GitHub repo your local project is linked with.
git remote -v

git push -u origin main
Purpose: Pushes main to GitHub for the first time and links local main with remote main.
Scenario: You already committed locally and now want your code uploaded to GitHub.
git push -u origin main
Important note: The "-u" means "remember this remote branch", so later you can often use just "git push".

git push
Purpose: Pushes new local commits to the already-linked remote branch.
Scenario: You made another commit later and want to upload it without writing the full remote and branch again.
git push

git push origin branch_name
Purpose: Pushes a specific branch to GitHub.
Scenario: You are working in a feature branch such as feature/search-bar and want that branch online.
git push origin feature/search-bar

6. Branch basics
git branch
Purpose: Lists all local branches and marks your current branch.
Scenario: You want to check whether you are on main or on a feature branch.
git branch

git branch -m main
Purpose: Renames the current branch to main.
Scenario: Your branch is still named master but your class or team uses main.
git branch -m main

git switch -c branch_name
Purpose: Creates a new branch and immediately switches to it.
Scenario: You want to build a login feature separately so main stays safe and stable.
git switch -c feature/login

git switch main
Purpose: Switches to the main branch.
Scenario: You finished working in a feature branch and want to return to the stable branch.
git switch main

git checkout main
Purpose: Also switches to main, but checkout is an older multi-purpose command.
Scenario: You are following older notes or slides that still use checkout for branch changes.
git checkout main
Important note: checkout is more confusing because it can switch branches, restore files, and open old commits.

Important concept: When you create a new branch, all files from the current commit are already available there by default. You do not manually add existing files to a new branch.

7. Branch naming
Example full branch name: SA/feature_dark-mode
Meaning: SA is the developer initials, / is just a separator, and feature_dark-mode describes the work. Git treats the whole thing as one branch name.
Scenario: If your name is Sagor Ahmed and you are building dark mode, a clear branch name is SA/feature_dark-mode.

8. Merging branches
git merge branch_name
Purpose: Brings changes from another branch into your current branch.
Scenario: You completed work in feature/login and now want that work inside main.
git switch main
git merge feature/login

Common team scenario: Your teammate updated main, and you want those new main changes in your own feature branch. In that case: git switch feature/login, then git merge main.

Very important correction: The command "git branch branchname" creates a branch. It does not merge changes. To combine changes, you must use "git merge branchname".

9. Pull, fetch, and updating from GitHub
git pull
Purpose: Downloads changes from the remote and merges them into your current branch.
Scenario: Your teammate pushed updates to GitHub and you want your local branch updated too.
git pull

git pull origin main
Purpose: Downloads and merges the latest remote main into your current local branch.
Scenario: You are on local main and want it to match GitHub main after your teammate updated it.
git pull origin main

git fetch
Purpose: Downloads remote changes only; it does not modify your working files.
Scenario: You want to safely inspect what changed on GitHub before actually merging those changes.
git fetch

Main difference: git pull = fetch + merge. git fetch = download only.
Hello World fetch scenario: Remote GitHub file changed from "<h1>Hello World</h1>" to "<h1>Hello Dhaka</h1>". You run git fetch. Git downloads the new commit, but your local file still stays Hello World until you merge or pull.

10. Diff commands
git diff
Purpose: Shows what changed in your working files compared with the last commit.
Scenario: Last commit had "<h1>Hello World</h1>" but you edited it to "<h1>Hello Dhaka</h1>". git diff shows that difference.
git diff

Possible output:
- <h1>Hello World</h1>
+ <h1>Hello Dhaka</h1>

git diff --staged
Purpose: Shows what is already staged for commit compared with the last commit.
Scenario: You used git add index.html and want to preview exactly what will go into the next commit.
git diff --staged

git diff origin/main
Purpose: Compares your local branch with the remote main branch.
Scenario: Your local code is still old, but GitHub main has newer work from a teammate, and you want to compare both versions before merging.
git fetch
git diff origin/main

How to exit diff view: If Git opens a pager, press "q" to quit.

11. Checkout for restoring files or old versions
git checkout file_name
Purpose: Restores one file to its last committed version.
Scenario: You edited index.html badly and want only that file rolled back.
git checkout index.html

git checkout .
Purpose: Restores all changed files to their last committed versions.
Scenario: You made wrong edits in many files and want the whole working directory back to the latest commit state.
git checkout .
Important note: This discards your current uncommitted edits.

git checkout <commit_id> file_name
Purpose: Restores one file from a specific older commit.
Scenario: The latest version of index.html is not what you want; you want the version from an older known-good commit.
git checkout a1b2c3d index.html

git checkout <commit_id> .
Purpose: Restores all files from a specific older commit into your working directory.
Scenario: Your current project is broken and you want the whole project as it looked in an older stable commit.
git checkout a1b2c3d .

Rule: file_name means one file only. A single dot means all files.

All except some files: There is no direct 'except' syntax. Practical workaround: first restore all files from an old commit, then restore selected files back from HEAD.
git checkout a1b2c3d .
git checkout HEAD -- style.css config.json

12. switch vs checkout
git switch: Best used only for changing branches. Cleaner and easier for beginners.
git checkout: Older multi-purpose command. It can switch branches, restore files, and check out commits.
Scenario: If you want to move from feature/login to main, git switch main is clearer than git checkout main. If you want to restore a file, checkout can do that too: git checkout index.html.

13. Merge conflicts
What is a conflict: A conflict happens when Git cannot automatically decide how to combine two versions.
Simple rule: Different file = usually no conflict. Same file, different lines = often no conflict. Same file, same line = conflict.
<<<<<<< HEAD
<h1>Hello Dhaka</h1>
=======
<h1>Hello World</h1>
>>>>>>> origin/main
Meaning: Top part (HEAD) is your current/local version. Bottom part is the incoming version. The line with ======= is the separator. It contains 7 equal signs.
What to do: Choose your version, the incoming version, or combine both. Then delete the conflict markers.
git add .
Purpose: Marks the conflict as resolved after you manually fix the file.
Scenario: You edited the conflicted file and removed the markers, so now Git needs to know the file is fixed.
git add .

git commit -m "Resolve conflict"
Purpose: Saves the final resolved version.
Scenario: After resolving the conflict, you want the merge to complete with your chosen final code.
git commit -m "Resolve conflict"


14. What happens when you pull with local changes
Case 1: no conflict: If your local changes and the remote changes are in different files, or in safe different lines, Git can usually merge them automatically.
Case 1 scenario: You changed index.html locally. Your teammate changed style.css on GitHub. You run git pull. Result: both changes stay; no conflict.
Case 2: conflict: If both sides changed the same file and same line, Git stops and asks you to resolve it manually.
Very important: git pull does not silently overwrite your work. It either merges safely or stops with a conflict.

15. Stash: temporary save for unfinished work
What stash means: Stash is temporary storage for uncommitted changes. It lets you hide unfinished work without making a commit.
git stash
Purpose: Temporarily saves uncommitted changes and returns the working directory to the last committed state.
Scenario: You are halfway through a login form, but suddenly need to switch to main to fix an urgent bug.
git stash

git stash push -m "WIP: login form"
Purpose: Creates a named stash.
Scenario: You have multiple unfinished works and want the stash to have a useful label.
git stash push -m "WIP: login form"

git stash list
Purpose: Shows all saved stashes.
Scenario: You saved more than one unfinished work and want to see which stash is which.
git stash list

git stash pop
Purpose: Applies the latest stash and then deletes it.
Scenario: You finished the urgent work and now want your original unfinished feature back.
git stash pop
Important note: pop = apply + delete

git stash apply
Purpose: Applies a stash but keeps it stored.
Scenario: You want to test the same stashed changes while still keeping the stash entry for later.
git stash apply
Important note: apply = apply + keep

git stash drop
Purpose: Deletes a stash without applying it.
Scenario: You no longer need that unfinished saved work.
git stash drop

Classic stash flow scenario: You are in feature/login, your work is unfinished, and your boss asks for an urgent fix in main. You run git stash, git switch main, fix the bug, then return to feature/login and run git stash pop.
git stash
git switch main
... fix bug ...
git switch feature/login
git stash pop

What you see when you come back before pop: You see only the last committed version of the branch. The stashed changes stay hidden until you pop or apply them.
Important branch rule: Stash is not permanently tied to the original branch. It can be applied to whichever branch is active when you run pop or apply.
Scenario: popping in another branch: If you stash in feature, switch to main, then run git stash pop in main, the changes are applied to main. If you go back to feature afterward, you will only see feature's committed state, because the stash was already used in main.
Scenario: same file on another branch: If the file is very different in the other branch, stash pop may itself create a conflict, just like a merge can.

16. Switching branches with uncommitted changes
Case 1: no conflict: Git may allow the switch, and your uncommitted changes can move with you because they live in the working directory.
Scenario: You changed index.html in feature/login. main has no conflicting version of that file. You run git switch main. Your uncommitted change may still appear there.
Case 2: conflict risk: Git blocks the switch and says your local changes would be overwritten.
Important answer: Your changes do not just vanish by themselves. Git either carries them or blocks the switch. They are lost only if you explicitly discard them with commands like git checkout . or git reset --hard.

17. Reset commands
git reset
Purpose: Unstages all staged files, but keeps the actual file changes.
Scenario: You used git add . by mistake and want to remove everything from the staging area without losing your work.
git reset

git reset file_name
Purpose: Unstages one specific file.
Scenario: You staged index.html and style.css, but only want style.css to remain staged.
git reset index.html

git reset HEAD~1
Purpose: Moves the branch back by one commit.
Scenario: You made a wrong last commit and want to undo it.
git reset HEAD~1

git reset HEAD~2
Purpose: Moves the branch back by two commits.
Scenario: The latest two commits are both wrong and you want to go back further.
git reset HEAD~2

git reset <commit_id>
Purpose: Moves the branch pointer to a specific commit.
Scenario: You know an exact older commit was stable and want to return to it.
git reset a1b2c3d

git reset --hard <commit_id>
Purpose: Forcefully resets files and branch history to that commit and discards current working changes.
Scenario: Your project is badly broken and you want the exact old state back, even if new work is lost.
git reset --hard a1b2c3d
Important note: Very dangerous: this can permanently delete uncommitted changes.

18. Deleting branches
git branch -d branch_name
Purpose: Deletes a local branch.
Scenario: You already merged feature/login into main and now want to clean up the local branch.
git branch -d feature/login

git push origin --delete branch_name
Purpose: Deletes a remote branch from GitHub.
Scenario: Your pull request was merged, so the online feature branch is no longer needed.
git push origin --delete feature/login

19. Fork, origin, and upstream
Fork: A fork is your own GitHub copy of someone else's repository.
Scenario: You want to contribute to a teacher's project or an open-source project, but you do not have direct push access to the original repo.
git clone https://github.com/YOU/project.git
Purpose: Clones your fork to your local computer.
Scenario: You forked a repo on GitHub and now want to work on your own copy in VS Code.
git clone https://github.com/sagor/project.git

git remote add upstream https://github.com/ORIGINAL/project.git
Purpose: Adds a connection to the original repository.
Scenario: You forked a teacher's repo and want to receive future updates from the original project.
git remote add upstream https://github.com/teacher/project.git
Important note: This does not update anything by itself. It only adds the connection.

git fetch upstream
Purpose: Downloads updates from the original repository without merging them.
Scenario: The teacher updated the original repo and you want those updates available locally first.
git fetch upstream

git pull upstream main
Purpose: Downloads and merges the original repository's main branch into your current local branch.
Scenario: Your fork is becoming outdated because the original teacher repo keeps changing.
git pull upstream main

Meaning of names: origin = your fork or your own remote repo. upstream = the original source repo.
Important answer: Adding upstream does not replace origin. You simply have two remotes now: origin and upstream.
If you do not need future updates: You do not need upstream at all. You can keep working only with origin.
Can you push to upstream?: Only if you have permission or collaborator access. Normally, students push to origin and then open a Pull Request to the original repo.
git remote remove upstream
Purpose: Removes the upstream connection.
Scenario: You added upstream earlier but later decide you no longer need updates from the original repo.
git remote remove upstream

20. Open-source / contribution workflow
Standard flow: Fork -> clone your fork -> add upstream -> create a branch -> make changes -> commit -> push to origin -> open a Pull Request to the original repo.
Scenario: You fix a typo or bug in a teacher's repo. Since you cannot push directly to the original, you push to your fork and ask the teacher to merge your change through a Pull Request.

21. .gitignore
What it is: A file that tells Git which files or folders should not be tracked.
Common examples: *.log, *.env, /venv
Scenario: You do not want to upload secret environment variables, local log files, or a Python virtual environment to GitHub.

22. Pushing directly to main and updating other branches
Important rule: If you push directly to main, other branches do not update automatically.
Scenario: You pushed a new change to main. feature/login and feature/cart still keep their old code until you manually update them.
git switch feature/login
git merge main
Result: feature/login now gets the latest main changes.

23. Same file in different branches
Case 1: same file, different lines: Git can often merge automatically.
Case 2: same file, same line: Conflict happens because Git cannot decide which version is correct.
Scenario: feature/login has "<h1>Hello Dhaka</h1>" while main has "<h1>Hello Bangladesh</h1>" on the same line. When you merge one into the other, Git will likely stop for conflict resolution.

24. Quick memory sheet
Command / Term	Fast meaning
git init	start Git in a folder
git clone	copy a repo from GitHub
git status	check current state
git add	stage files
git commit	save staged changes
git push	send commits to GitHub
git pull	get and merge remote changes
git fetch	download remote changes only
git diff	see differences
git switch	change branches
git merge	combine branches
git stash	temporary save for unfinished work
origin	your remote repo
upstream	original source repo
git checkout file	restore one file
git checkout .	restore all changed files
git reset	unstage or move back


How to log in github          “gh auth login”
Create repo in terminal gh repo create "crud-project-simple" --public --source=. --remote=origin –push

Another option 
gh repo create Football --public
git remote add origin https://github.com/your-username/Football.git
git push -u origin main
git --no-pager log --oneline